Introduction
In Python, understanding how data types behave, especially in relation to mutability and immutability, is crucial for
writing efficient and bug-free code. These concepts impact everything from memory management to function behavior. In
this blog post, we’ll explore how Python handles variables, the difference between mutable and immutable objects, and
how arguments are passed to functions. By the end, you’ll have a clear understanding of how Python manages memory and
how it treats different types of data.

id and Type
Every object in Python has a unique identifier, which can be obtained using the built-in id() function. The id()
function returns the memory address of the object, which helps us understand whether two variables are referencing the
same object. The type() function, on the other hand, allows us to determine the type of the object. These two functions
are essential for tracking the state of variables in Python and can help diagnose issues related to memory and object
references, especially when dealing with mutable and immutable data types.

Mutable Objects
Mutable objects in Python are those that can be changed after they are created. Lists, dictionaries, and sets are
examples of mutable objects. When a mutable object is modified, the changes are made in place, meaning the object’s
memory address (and id()) does not change. For example, if you append an item to a list, the list itself is modified,
and no new object is created. This behavior is important to understand because it can lead to unintended side effects if
the same object is referenced in different places in your code.

Immutable Objects
Immutable objects, on the other hand, cannot be modified once they are created. Examples of immutable objects include
integers, strings, and tuples. When you modify an immutable object, a new object is created instead of modifying the
original one. For instance, when you try to change a string or a tuple, Python creates a new object with the updated
value. This distinction is important because immutable objects can be safely shared across multiple parts of a program
without the risk of unexpected changes, whereas mutable objects can be altered and potentially lead to bugs if shared
incorrectly.

Why Does It Matter and How Differently Does Python Treat Mutable and Immutable Objects
The difference between mutable and immutable objects significantly impacts how Python handles memory and variable
assignments. Immutable objects are stored once, and their values cannot be changed, which allows Python to optimize
memory usage by reusing the same object when possible. Mutable objects, however, are copied or referenced depending on
how they are assigned, and modifications to them affect the original object. This distinction matters because it
influences performance (immutable objects can be cached for efficiency) and the behavior of your code, especially when
passing objects to functions or sharing them between different parts of your program.

How Arguments Are Passed to Functions and What Does That Imply for Mutable and Immutable Objects
In Python, function arguments are passed by reference, meaning the function receives a reference to the original object,
not a copy of it. However, the behavior of this passing mechanism differs for mutable and immutable objects. For
immutable objects, since they cannot be modified in place, any changes made inside the function result in the creation
of a new object, leaving the original object unchanged. For mutable objects, since they can be modified in place, any
changes made inside the function will affect the original object. This behavior is critical to understand to avoid
unintended side effects in your functions. If you need to protect an object from being modified within a function, you
should use a copy or create a new object explicitly. Understanding this distinction helps in writing functions that
behave as expected and avoid altering data unexpectedly.

In conclusion, understanding how Python handles mutable and immutable objects, and how arguments are passed to
functions, is fundamental to writing efficient and reliable code. By leveraging the right object types for the task at
hand and carefully considering how data is shared across different parts of your program, you can avoid common pitfalls
and write cleaner, more predictable code.